### LVs link genes that alter lipid accumulation with relevant traits and tissues

In our first experiment, we aimed to determine if genes in a disease-relevant LV could serve as potential therapeutic targets.
To do this, we utilized a fluorescence-based CRISPR-Cas9 approach in the HepG2 cell line, identifying 462 genes associated with lipid regulation.
From this pool, we selected two high-confidence gene sets: one that led to a decrease in lipids, consisting of eight genes (*BLCAP*, *FBXW7*, *INSIG2*, *PCYT2*, *PTEN*, *SOX9*, *TCF7L2*, *UBE2J2*), and another that caused an increase in lipids, comprised of six genes (*ACACA*, *DGAT2*, *HILPDA*, *MBTPS1*, *SCAP*, *SRPR*) (Supplementary Data 2).
This selection process is detailed in the Methods section.


![
**Tissues and traits associated with a gene module related to lipid metabolism (LV246).**
<!--  -->
**a)** Top cell types/tissues in which LV246's genes are expressed.
Values in the $y$-axis come from matrix $\mathbf{B}$ in the MultiPLIER models (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b, see Methods).
In the $x$-axis, cell types/tissues are sorted by the maximum sample value.
<!--  -->
**b)** Gene-trait associations (unadjusted $p$-values from S-MultiXcan [@doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007889]; threshold at -log($p$)=10) and colocalization probability (fastENLOC) for the top traits in LV246.
The top 40 genes in LV246 are shown, sorted by their LV weight (matrix $\mathbf{Z}$), from largest (the top gene *SCD*) to smallest (*FAR2*);
*DGAT2* and *ACACA*, in boldface, are two of the six high-confidence genes in the lipids-increasing gene set from the CRISPR screen.
Cardiovascular-related traits are in boldface.
<!--  -->
SGBS: Simpson Golabi Behmel Syndrome;
CH2DB: CH<sub>2</sub> groups to double bonds ratio;
HDL: high-density lipoprotein;
RCP: locus regional colocalization probability.
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv246/lv246.svg "LV246 TWAS plot"){#fig:lv246 width="100%"}


We analyzed 987 Latent Variables (LVs) using Fast Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (FGSEA), identifying 15 LVs enriched with lipid-altering gene sets at a nominal significance level (P < 0.01).
Among these, LV246 stood out as the top LV associated with genes co-expressed in adipose tissue, crucial for lipid metabolism regulation.
Regression analysis in PhenomeXcan revealed that gene weights in LV246 were predictive of gene associations for plasma lipids, high cholesterol, and Alzheimer's disease.
These associations were replicated across 309 traits in eMERGE, where LV246 showed significant links to hypercholesterolemia, hyperlipidemia, and disorders of lipoid metabolism.


Two high-confidence genes identified in our CRISPR screening, DGAT2 and ACACA, encode enzymes for triglycerides and fatty acid synthesis and were among the highest-weighted genes of LV246 (Figure 2b).
However, unlike other genes in LV246, DGAT2 and ACACA were not associated with any cardiovascular-related traits.
Instead, genes like SCD, LPL, FADS2, HMGCR, and LDLR in LV246 showed significant associations with lipid-related traits.
This lack of association for DGAT2 and ACACA may be explained by the omnigenic theory.
If the TWAS models for DGAT2 and ACACA capture all common cis-eQTLs and there are no rare cis-eQTLs, these genes may be considered "core" genes directly affecting the trait without regulation from other genes, while the other genes in LV246 may be "peripheral" genes that regulate them.

